ember-template-assert blog post (#1974)
mainmatter/mainmatter.com: src/posts/2023-01-13-ember-template-assert.md

---
title:
  "Building a template assertion Ember addon that removes itself from production"
authorHandle: nickschot
tags: ember
bio: "Nick Schot"
description:
  "Nick Schot explains how to build an Ember addon that completely removes
  itself from production builds."
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2022-12-09-sending-emails-from-the-edge-with-rust/og-image.jpg
tagline: |

>   <p>Sometimes there is the need for development-time only functionality, in this case in the form of an Ember addon. What we'd like to build is an addon that provides us with an <a href="https://api.emberjs.com/ember/4.6/functions/@ember%2Fdebug/assert">assert</a> template helper so that we can use these development time assertions in templates as well.</p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <p>Sometimes there is the need for development-time-only functionality, in this case in the form of an Ember addon. We'd like to build an addon that provides us with an <a href="https://api.emberjs.com/ember/4.6/functions/@ember%2Fdebug/assert">assert</a> template helper so that we can use these development time assertions in templates as well.</p>
```

image: "/assets/images/posts/2022-12-09-sending-emails-from-the-edge-with-rust/rust-mail-server.png"
imageAlt: ""
---

Ember's `assert` function can be helpful to add checks meant for developers to
make sure, for example, that the correct data is passed.

```javascript
assert("Must pass myArgument", myArgument !== undefined);
```

The `assert` statement by default runs only for development builds and is
completely stripped from production. This rather useful functionality does by

> default nog have an equal in an Ember template. This could be a useful addition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
default not have an equal in an Ember template. This could be a useful addition
```

> especially for template only components, which have no JavaScript backing class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
especially for template-only components, which have no JavaScript backing class.
```

As such we'll create this helper and use this as an opportunity to show how to
strip such an addon completely from production builds.

## The `assert` helper

The helper itself is quite minimal, since we only need to wrap the original
`assert` function provided by Ember in a helper. We can first use ember-cli to
generate a helper with `ember g helper assert`. In an addon this will generate 3
files. The file where our implementation will be `/addon/helpers/assert.js`, a
re-export that will make the helper discoverable by Ember apps

> `/app/helpers/assert.js` and a test file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`/app/helpers/assert.js`, and a test file.
```

Note that from Ember 4.5 onwards it is also possible to use plain functions as
helpers, removing the need to wrap the function in a `helper()` call. For

> backwards compatibility reasons however, we will keep it for now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
backward compatibility reasons, however, we will keep it for now.
```

    };
  },
};
```

### Writing the AST transform

The next thing we want to do is make sure we remove all calls of `{{assert}}`
from the templates in production builds. If we do not remove these, apart from
shipping unnecessary code, Ember would also throw an error after we remove the
helper code itself from the build in the next step.

We can do this by writing a small visitor statement in the following format:

```javascript
"use strict";

module.exports = function emberTemplateAssertTransform(env) {
  let visitor = {};
  if (env.isProduction) {
    visitor = {
      MustacheStatement(node) {
        if (node.path.original === "assert") {
          return null;
        }
      },
    };
  }

  return {
    name: "ember-template-assert",
    visitor,
  };
};

module.exports.baseDir = function () {
  return __dirname;
};

module.exports.cacheKey = function () {
  return "ember-template-assert";
};
```

The important bit here is:

```javascript
visitor = {
  MustacheStatement(node) {
    if (node.path.original === "assert") {
      return null;
    }
  },
};
```

This will remove all Mustache statements (any template statement that has

> handlebars syntax like `{{...}}`) with the name `assert`. Since we want to

Author: Oh or are you talking about nested helper usage with parens?

remove all assert statements, there's no need to look at the arguments that are
passed in to the assert helper.

## Removing the helper code itself from production

In order to remove our addon files from production builds, we can rely on a
plugin for broccoli called `broccoli-funnel`. It will allow us to specify file
paths that need to be filtered from the addon's file tree. After adding the
`broccoli-funnel` dependency, we can modify `index.js` again to add the
following section:

```javascript
  treeForAddon(tree) {
    let Funnel = require('broccoli-funnel');

    let app = this._findHost();
    if (app.isProduction) {
      tree = new Funnel(tree, {
        exclude: ['helpers/assert.js'],
      });
    }

    return this._super.treeForAddon.call(this, tree);
  }
```

Of course, like the AST transform, we only want to remove the helper from the
build in production environments which we achieve by checking

> `app.isProduction`. We can remove the file from the build by specifying
> `exclude: ['helpers/assert.js]` which matches the file path of the helper itself
> but not the re-export in the app folder.
> 
> For that we also need to add the very similar hook called `treeForApp` which
> handles everything in the `app` folder of your v1 ember addon.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure on the wording, but I feel like adding (sort of) absolute paths to the helper and its re-export would clarify this a bit.

```suggestion
`app.isProduction`. We can remove the file from the build by specifying
`exclude: ['helpers/assert.js]` which matches the file path of the helper itself in the addon directory - 
 `addon/helpers/assert.js`

However we also need to remove the helper from the app tree itself - `app/helpers/assert.js`.
For that we also need to add the very similar hook called `treeForApp` which
handles everything in the `app` folder of your v1 ember addon.
```

Author: I've reworded it a bit, but applied the suggestion generally. Thanks!
